Welcome, everyone.
Hope you can hear me OK.
Great.
Well, I just want to say we are really,
really thrilled to be doing
today's presentation on 3D graphics
for iPhone OS using OpenGL ES.
And as we look out at the crowd here,
it's really great to see all of you here.
As Steve and Bertrand
and Scott have mentioned,
we do believe this is the
birth of a real new platform,
brand new platform.
And you guys are all the key to
making that platform a reality.
So we are looking at teaching
you today about OpenGL ES.
And we're going to talk about
OpenGL ES on the iPhone.
And to do that, we're going to take a
brief look at our agenda.
So first off,
first thing we're going to do
in today's talk is talk about
a brief overview of OpenGL ES,
what it is, and how you'll use it,
and how it compares to desktop OpenGL,
which you've probably used before,
or how it compares to some
other 3D programming APIs,
which you might be familiar with.
The next thing that we're going to do
is talk about OpenGL ES on the iPhone.
Now, in developing OpenGL ES for
the iPhone OS,
We implemented some new APIs,
we created some key technologies,
and we developed some key concepts
that we want you to become familiar
with as you develop your applications.
And the reason that we want you to
become familiar with these concepts
in particular is that some of
them are unique to the iPhone OS,
and some of them are simply
unique to embedded development,
developing for small consumer
electronics products like the iPhone,
and other products in this similar class.
And this may be an area where
you may not be familiar with if
you've done desktop programming.
Some of those key technologies
are the areas of integration
with the rest of the iPhone OS,
and some of them are some new APIs.
We'll talk about those today.
Next,
we'll talk about the iPhone simulator
and OpenGL ES support there,
and how you can use it,
how you can use it to
develop your application,
what it's good for,
and what you need to use
the device for instead.
And last, we'll talk about our
recommendations for best practices,
some caveats with the device,
and just how to use the device to be
the most efficient and to develop the
most highest performing and the best
looking applications that you can.
So let's move to the next section
of our talk today and begin
by thinking about some of our
assumptions about your background.
So first of all,
this is not going to be a talk
to teach basic 3D graphics.
We're going to assume you have
some background in this area.
And judging by the size
of the crowd here today,
I can assume that that's probably true.
There's a lot of folks here,
and it looks like you're ready to do
some very cool 3D graphics programming.
So we'll also assume that you know
OpenGL 1.5 and its extension mechanism.
There's a few other key technologies
we'll make the assumption that you
know at least a little bit about.
The first of those is
Cocoa and Objective-C,
or Cocoa Touch today,
as we've talked about in the iPhone,
and Core Animation and UI Kit.
Now, on these last two subjects,
you might not be experts yet.
There's a ton of great information
here at WWDC in the iPhone SDK on
Apple's developer website for you to
familiarize yourself with these concepts.
And we won't be looking
at them too deeply,
but we do assume a little bit of
familiarity to understand some
of the code snippets we'll show.
All right.
With that, let's begin.
So as we mentioned,
the first thing we'd like to do is
start with an overview of OpenGL ES.
And the very first thing you
need to know about OpenGL ES is
that it is a subset of OpenGL.
So if you've done
OpenGL programming on the Mac,
on Windows, on other platforms,
you'll feel right at home with OpenGL ES.
The basic concepts are the same.
The basic methodology programming
the API is extremely similar.
And you can use the same
basic programming techniques
for your 3D graphics.
OpenGL ES is an industry standard.
It's an open standard,
which means it has multi-platform
support across a wide
variety of hardware vendors.
This list of hardware vendors includes
many hardware vendors that maybe you
haven't even seen before if you haven't
done embedded device programming.
But it's actually
incredibly well supported,
and there are just literally millions,
if not billions,
of devices using this API.
The reason that it is a subset of
Open GL 1.5 is part of -- part of the
reason is because it is focused on
targeting an embedded class device.
And what does that mean?
Well, these are small consumer
electronics devices.
They typically run off a battery.
The iPhone is a perfect example.
But others are set-top boxes, GPS units,
other types of small devices.
And the API is specifically targeted
to try and drive this class of device.
And as we talk about what Open GL ES is
a little later in the presentation,
you can see how certain design choices
were made to favor these devices.
Perhaps most importantly, though,
OpenGL ES is a full-featured
hardware acceleration API.
So it fully supports 3D graphics
programming with fixed function
vertex and pixel processing.
So as we move on,
let's take a look first at some of the
API design goals of why OpenGL ES was
created the way that it was.
As I mentioned,
it was specifically designed
for embedded class devices.
Now, really what this means in terms
of the API design is that the
API had to be designed for the
implementations themselves to be smaller.
Smaller in lots of ways.
Smaller in the amount
of power that they use,
because these devices are
typically on a battery or some
other limited power budget.
Smaller in the amount of
memory that they consume.
Smaller in the amount of processor
cycles that they consume.
The typical processors and
memory systems for these devices,
while incredibly powerful,
might be considerably smaller than what
you're used to if you've done any kind of
desktop or workstation class programming.
A second key point about the API design
goals for OpenGL ES is that there was an
intention in the design to take advantage
of the fact that the API was new.
And it was targeting a
new class of devices,
trying to bring this
functionality to them.
As a result,
there wasn't a huge amount of legacy
support that people had to worry about.
And while they wanted to
maintain a certain consistency
with the API of OpenGL,
there was not a need to retain
exact binary or API compatibility.
And this gave us, the Kronos group,
who developed OpenGL ES API,
an opportunity to actually
remove some obsolete functions,
to clean up the API,
and to think very carefully about
what to include and what not to
include in order to fit in some of
these constraints I've just outlined.
And as a consequence,
or perhaps another motivation
for this type of design,
So, the API was consciously designed
with the idea that there does not
have to be a software fallback
or a means for the CPU to execute
things that the GPU cannot.
As a result,
what's actually in the API is very,
very likely to be hardware accelerated.
And this is actually a benefit to you,
because you can actually use it
to run things that the GPU cannot.
And this is actually a benefit to you,
because you can actually use it
to run things that the GPU cannot.
All right,
so let's take a look next at the
traditional 3D graphics pipeline.
If you've done any
OpenGL programming before,
this will look very familiar to you.
And this is the exact same 3D
pipeline used by OpenGL ES.
So you start with your traditional
stages of geometry processing,
rasterization, texturing,
fragment processing,
and frame buffer operations.
And you'll see that as we walk
through the features of OpenGL ES,
that these same stages,
the same pipeline applies.
So what I'm going to do next is kind of
walk through each of these stages and
show specific features in OpenGL ES,
and particularly how they
compare to desktop OpenGL.
And this should give you a good feel for
what's in the API and how you can use it.
So let's take a look first at
the geometry processing stage.
Now, the first thing I want to say on
this slide in particular is that you
can see from the sort of inclusion
features here of what's included and
what's been removed relative to desktop
OpenGL that this is a full-featured API.
It fully supports geometry processing,
vertex array-based rendering,
buffer objects, vertex lighting, shading,
et cetera.
But there's a few key features
that have been removed.
And again,
the reason they've been removed
is because some of these
features are inefficient,
perhaps inefficient
even on desktop systems.
Some of them have become redundant,
and then a few of them are not
likely to be accelerated on some
of these embedded class devices.
Thank you.
The one you're going to notice here,
probably if you've done any
OpenGL programming before,
that's probably the most key,
is the immediate mode entry points.
Specifying vertices one at a
time is likely to be inefficient,
again, even on desktop systems,
and was removed from the API.
Let's take a look next at the
rasterization phase of the pipeline.
And here, once again,
there's very full features.
So you've seen from some of the demos
that we've done so far that you can
create really terrific looking 3D
games and applications with OpenGL ES.
In fact,
you can see some of those games in
Steve's keynote and some of the other
examples from the application store.
Now, a few key features here
have been removed as well.
So if you look on the right side,
you'll see quad and polygon
primitives have been removed.
And once again,
the reason they've been removed is
because they're largely redundant.
You can actually do quads and polygons
with triangles and other techniques.
Things like draw pixels and copy
pixels have also been removed.
But again,
you can implement these with what's
remaining in the OpenGL ES API.
So this is all an attempt to make
the API smaller to fit in the types
of devices that can fit in your
pocket or that are just generally
constrained to run the OpenGL ES API.
In the texturing stage,
here you have 2D texturing,
multi-texturing,
lots of different formats,
lots of different filters,
mipmap generation.
So again, it's very full-featured.
However, certain features,
such as secondary color,
and features that might require
a considerable amount of memory,
such as 3D texturing,
or that might require a considerable
amount of CPU processing,
such as converting from one
type of pixel format to another,
have been removed.
And last, when we look in the
fragment processing stage,
when we look at this stage,
we actually see that there's not
very much that's been removed at all.
There's a few blend equations
that have been removed,
but largely the whole feature
set is there from OpenGL.
And this is key,
because most of your processing in these
types of devices is in the pixel space,
in the fragment processing space.
And the API here is very full-featured.
And finally, if we took a look at frame
buffer operations and some of the
miscellaneous features of the API,
we can see that there's actually
only a few things that are probably
unlikely to be used in this space
that are actually been removed.
So double precision is a good example.
Because double precision
is a feature that,
once again, on the desktop is often not
even accelerated and has
been removed from the API.
Or other features that require a
certain amount of CPU-based processing,
such as pushing and
popping your OpenGL state.
I've gone through this in a hurry
because we mostly want to point you
at the official specification for
OpenGL ES to give you all of the details.
If you take a look at Kronos' website,
as I mentioned earlier,
Kronos is the organization that
controls the OpenGL ES standard.
This is an open standard,
just like OpenGL, which they also define.
They have a website that
defines all of this.
It provides a full
specification of the behavior,
and it also provides a
different specification,
sort of similar to what
I've been doing here today.
Theirs is actually much more
formal and much more detailed.
So here's an example showing
some of the features that
are present in OpenGL ES and
some of them that are absent.
And you can compare this to the
full OpenGL specification to get
a good feel for what's in the API.
So in the interest of time,
I'm going to move on from what's
actually in the OpenGL ES core
functionality set itself and talk a
little bit about OpenGL ES extensions.
So OpenGL ES extensions work
just like OpenGL extensions.
And this is important in
a couple different ways.
First of all,
it's the exact same mechanism
that you used in OpenGL.
So if you've done OpenGL programming,
you know that you have to query
for the list of extensions that are
supported by your implementation.
And that those extensions can
be named to indicate whether
they're supported by one vendor,
multiple vendors,
or some official extension
by the Kronos group.
Such extensions would have
the arb or oes suffix on them.
So let's go ahead and look at some
of the extensions that we've used.
And this last point up here is key.
Implementations will support
different sets of extensions,
perhaps across different
driver revisions.
So you need to make sure to always query
for the extensions before you use them,
and make sure that you are prepared
to deal with their presence or
absence at any given time if you
choose to use extension features.
So we won't talk about all of the
extensions that we support in the
OpenGL ES implementation on the iPhone,
but we'll talk about a couple of them
because they highlight some kind of key
characteristics of OpenGL ES extensions.
So the first one I want to highlight
here is the OES map buffer extension.
I call this one out not
necessarily because it's an
amazing piece of functionality,
but it's a good example of
a feature which is actually
a core part of OpenGL 1.5,
meaning it's required.
Every implementation supports it.
And it's actually an optional
extension in OpenGL ES.
The API is essentially the same.
It has some suffixes on the function
entry points and enumerants,
but otherwise it's basically the same.
And like all extensions,
you need to query before you use it
to find out whether it's present or
not on your particular implementation.
On ours it is, but this is a good example
of this type of extension.
Another key extension that is a good
example to show about certain properties
of extensions in OpenGL ES is the
IMG Texture Compression PVRTC extension.
Now, this extension I highlight partly
because we encourage you very highly
to use this extension when doing
iPhone OS programming for OpenGL ES,
but also because it's a good
example of an extension which is
particular to a specific GPU vendor
or perhaps even a specific GPU.
will talk more about this
extension a little later on.
The last one I want to highlight
here out of this list is the
OES Frame Buffer Object Extension.
Now, we mention this because,
first of all, we make heavy use of this
extension on the iPhone OS,
and we use it for configuring all
of your frame buffer operations.
So when you're going to decide what
format your frame buffer should
be for OpenGL ES or whether you
should have a depth buffer or not,
you'll be using this extension.
This might be a little different
than some other implementations
of OpenGL and OpenGL ES,
in that some of them have other means
of configuring the frame buffer.
But here, this is what you'll use.
So we'll talk more in depth
about it in a few moments.
Okay, so that's all we're going
to say about extensions.
But what we want to do now is take
a look at some OpenGL ES code.
And first,
we'll start off by comparing it to
the corresponding code in OpenGL 1.5,
just to give you a feel for how
they compare with each other.
So the first thing we have
here is some OpenGL code,
and it's basically setting up some state.
It's going to set up some
transformation state.
And then at the end,
at the last line here,
it's going to do some drawing.
Now, I'd like to take a look at what
this code would look like if
we converted it to OpenGL ES.
So as you can see,
actually hardly anything
here has changed.
And that's the point,
that with the exception
of one routine here,
which actually has a slightly
different suffix because,
again, there's no double
precision floating point.
There's a GL ortho call,
which takes single precision arguments.
With that small exception,
this is exactly the same code.
We think this is really,
really powerful because this
means that if you're used
to doing OpenGL programming,
if you have a large body of code,
if you have games that could
run in OpenGL or applications,
converting them to
OpenGL ES should be very,
very straightforward.
Now there's some caveats and some
tips and techniques specific to
OpenGL ES and even further specific to
the iPhone that we'll go over here today.
But this is a big takeaway point,
is that you should realize that
you're probably very familiar with
OpenGL ES before you ever get started.
And there's a few other minor
code changes of this flavor,
such as some extensions have
slightly different suffixes,
some features have become
optional that used to be core,
and there's this change from
double to single precision,
but largely it's very, very,
very similar.
All right, so that's OpenGL ES.
And now we want to talk about
using OpenGL ES on the iPhone.
And here, once again,
we've got several key technologies
and concepts we want you
to become familiar with,
and I'm going to go over them now.
The first thing I'd like to say is
that we have a full OpenGL ES 1.1
implementation on the iPhone.
That means it's fully
hardware accelerated,
fixed function, vertex,
and fragment processing.
And it's very highly performant.
You can create really, really,
really great games with the iPhone.
And you've seen some of them already in
the keynotes that have gone on so far,
and in the game session
that was earlier today.
So you think there's just an
amazing amount of potential here.
And I look at some of these demos,
and I see the things we've
shown in the keynote,
some of the things we've shown that are
going to be on the application store.
And I'm still blown away.
I can't believe this is a cell phone.
This is a thing you usually
are just answering calls with,
and it has this really,
really fantastic 3D implementation.
Thank you.
The other thing we want to say is that it
is-- our implementation for OpenGL ES on
the iPhone is efficiently integrated
with the iPhone user interface.
Now,
we do this in a couple different ways,
but the way you'll probably run into it
the most often is that Core Animation,
which provides the key to the
user interface on the iPhone,
Core animation layers can actually
serve as OpenGL ES rendering surfaces.
This means that you can render
directly into a core animation layer,
and then use it as you would essentially
any other core animation layer.
You can create some
amazing user interfaces,
and you can create some very
efficient use of the 3D pipeline on
the iPhone using these techniques.
And we'll go over them in a few moments.
But because you can put your
content in a core animation layer,
this means your content
becomes a first class citizen.
This is not just switch
into OpenGL ES mode,
do some 3D rendering,
and then shut everything down,
and then draw your user interface.
They can be very carefully integrated,
and they can be composited together.
This is key to providing the
seamless type of graphics
experience on the iPhone.
All right, so let's take a look next at a
little bit of background about
how OpenGL ES typically interacts
with its host environment or
its host operating system,
and then we'll talk about exactly
how that works on the iPhone.
So there's three
APIs we've listed up here,
or really three types of APIs.
The first one is OpenGL or
OpenGL ES itself.
And this provides the rendering API,
the thing you're actually
going to draw with.
But it doesn't define anything
about how you start up,
how you initialize your context,
or how you display anything.
And for that, we turn to some other APIs.
We call the first one a platform API,
or the OpenGL ES platform API.
And it's basically responsible
for the device initialization,
the initial configuration,
creating your rendering context.
And there's some examples up here.
If you've done programming on the Mac,
you're probably familiar
with AGL and CGL,
or NSOpenGL, or Windows, it's WGL,
or other embedded devices, it's EGL.
And these are all sort of similar
types of platform APIs in this respect.
And then generally,
there's a native Windows system
API that's actually responsible
for displaying your content.
On the Mac, that might be Quartz.
On Linux or Unix, it might be X Windows.
And it's going to be responsible
for taking your content
and putting it on a screen.
So how does that look?
Well, normally there's this sort of block
diagram that takes your application code,
where you'll manage your
surfaces through your display,
native Windows system API.
You'll manage your context.
You'll manage your context
through this type of platform API.
And then you'll do your drawing
through OpenGL or OpenGL ES.
Now, if we take a look at this diagram
as it pertains to the iPhone,
you'll see that basically we have
implemented the native windowing
system API with core animation.
This is the API that's going to be
responsible for doing your display,
for presenting your interface,
and integrating the two.
And we've implemented the
platform API with a new
API introduced in the iPhone OS.
Called EAGL or Eagle.
And we're going to speak much more
in depth about both of those now.
All right, so first off, Eagle.
Well, the first thing you're going to
see is that Eagle serves the role
of our iPhone OS platform API,
and is specifically responsible
for defining the interface in
between OpenGL ES and the iPhone OS.
What does this mean?
Well,
this means this is the API that's going
to manage your device initialization,
your rendering contexts.
And it's also the API that's
going to do the communication on
your behalf with Core Animation,
our native windowing system,
to display your content.
And the last point is that,
as we mentioned earlier,
it's also going to use the
OES Frame Buffer Object API for
its drawable configuration.
And we'll talk more about how that works.
So the first part of the
Eagle API that you're going to run
into is the Eagle Context Object.
The Eagle context is an abstract
data type that represents
all of your OpenGL ES state,
as well as your command streams.
So you can have one of these
Eagle contexts current at any
given time for your thread.
And this is because OpenGL ES,
just like OpenGL on the Mac,
is not a thread-safe API.
Whenever you've made one of these
contexts current to your thread,
all the OpenGL commands that
you issue will then be done
with respect to that context.
Let's take a look at
what that looks like.
So in order to set up an Eagle context,
you follow only really
basically two steps before
you can issue OpenGL commands.
I've outlined them up here.
So the first one is you're
going to allocate and initialize
the Eagle context itself.
And to do that,
you basically follow this sort
of standard Objective-C object
initialization and
allocation methodology.
So we allocate an object,
and then we're going to initialize it.
In this particular case,
we initialize it with an argument that
defines the rendering API we want to use.
OpenGL ES 1.
If we look at the second
block of code up here,
we'll see the second step we have to take
is to set that context to become current.
Once that context is current,
we are basically ready to
issue OpenGL ES commands.
And that's our third
block of code up here.
It issues a single OpenGL ES command
to get the renderer string identifying
which renderer we're using.
So this is very simple.
It's actually just two steps.
You can issue OpenGL ES commands.
But you're probably asking
yourself an important question.
If I were to draw right now,
where would my rendering go?
This is an important point when
you're doing 3D graphics programming.
So for that,
we turn to frame buffer objects.
Now, on OpenGL ES for the iPhone,
we use frame buffer objects,
or sometimes called FBOs,
for all of your rendering.
This is probably different from
some other environments in which
you've used OpenGL ES or OpenGL,
because we use it for both
on-screen and off-screen rendering,
as well as all of your
displayable content.
And the API is defined by this
OES frame buffer object extension
that we keep talking about.
So a framebuffer object is simply
an OpenGL ES state object that
contains references to color,
depth, and stencil buffers.
And those color, depth,
and stencil buffers can themselves
be stored in other OpenGL ES objects,
such as textures, or a new type of object
called a render buffer,
which is simply a buffer that stores
an image that you can render into.
All right, so let's take a look at
what this looks like,
sort of the object relationship
and how you use this code.
So the first step in creating a
framebuffer object is to call the
gen and bind framebuffer routines.
Once again,
if you've done any OpenGL programming,
this will be very familiar to you.
And the API for OES framebuffer object is
heavily derived from the ext framebuffer
object extension in desktop OpenGL.
So this is very traditional
OpenGL programming.
You generate a name,
you bind it to your context,
and we've created a frame buffer object.
The second step is to actually
allocate the buffers where we're
going to store our image data.
So once again,
we call generate-- gen render buffers,
bind render buffers to bind it to
our context to create these objects.
And then we'll make a third call,
render buffer storage.
Now render buffer storage's
purpose is to actually do the
allocation of these buffers for you,
to actually allocate the memory that's
going to store your pixel values.
Now we've got render buffers allocated,
a frame buffer.
The last step is actually to
attach them to each other.
So we call frame buffer render buffer.
This is somewhat of a confusing name,
but it follows the GL methodology
of naming the object that we're
attaching to another object.
So we're attaching a render
buffer to a frame buffer.
Let's look at that code a
little more briefly here.
And so you can see we
have these steps outlined.
This is basically what you would need
to do to set up a frame buffer object
to do OpenGL ES rendering on the iPhone.
Now you don't need to write this down,
because we actually provide an
Xcode template that outlines
and handles all of this for you.
But we want you to
understand how it's working.
So we'll go over it real quickly.
You simply generate the names for
your frame buffer and render buffer.
You bind the frame buffer and
render buffer to your context.
You allocate some storage
for the render buffer,
and then you attach the render
buffer to the frame buffer.
Okay.
So, use Eagle to create
your OpenGL ES context,
and you use the OBS Frame Buffer
Object API to configure
your frame buffer.
Now you probably have
yet another question.
How do we actually display this content?
Well, for that,
we're going to turn to another class,
another part of the Eagle API,
another part of the Core Animation API,
and that is the CA Eagle layer.
Now, the CA Eagle layer is essentially
nothing more than a subclass
of a Core Animation layer,
but one that is specifically designed
to display OpenGL ES content.
It essentially integrates
the OpenGL ES and
Core Animation APIs together.
It allows you to render
into a Core Animation layer.
And because you can attach one of these
objects to an OpenGL ES render buffer,
you can now render directly into the
objects that are displayed on screen.
So very briefly,
we can see how do we use this.
Let me outline the steps real quickly.
So the first thing you need to do is
subclass a UIView that you're going to
use to display your rendered contents.
Why do we do this?
Well, in Cocoa Touch,
every UIView object is backed
by a core animation layer.
So we want to back this
particular UI view by a specific
kind of core animation layer,
namely one that you can render into.
And the way that you do that is you're
going to override a method of the UIView,
the layer class method,
to return the CA Eagle layer class
instead of the CA layer class.
The next thing you'll do, as we outlined,
is create and bind an
OpenGL ES render buffer and an FBO.
You're going to attach your
CA Eagle layer to your render buffer.
[Transcript missing]
Let's look at how these
objects relate to each other.
So you start with the
Eagle context itself.
And the next thing you're going to do,
as we said, is bind a new render buffer.
Once you've done that,
you typically would allocate storage,
as we were saying before,
to do some rendering.
And this would generally
generate an internal allocation
of renderable storage.
But we're actually going to take
a slightly different tack here,
because we don't want
to just render to this.
We want to display it.
So we're going to make
another call in the Eagle API.
And this API is the similarly named
render buffer storage from drawable.
And what this routine does,
it actually allocates renderable and
displayable storage simultaneously,
and then shares that storage
by attaching the CA Eagle layer
to the render buffer object.
Now the CA Eagle layer,
as we keep mentioning,
is nothing more than a subclass
of your core animation layer.
And then the last step is you want
to present your render buffer,
called Eagle Context
Present Render Buffer,
to actually display this on screen.
So wherever this core animation
layer would be displayed on screen,
that's where your content will go.
Now we have some recommendations a little
later in the presentation about the
best and most efficient way to do that,
but that's basically how these
objects relate to each other.
So let's take a look next at how you
would actually get your rendering into
one of these displayable render buffers.
So we have this configuration
we've just set up.
Next thing you would do is you would
allocate your frame buffer object.
You would bind that frame
buffer object to your context.
So now all your rendering will
go to your frame buffer object.
And the last step is to
attach your render buffer,
the one you've attached
to your CA Eagle layer,
to the frame buffer.
Now you've created a pathway by which
your Eagle Context can issue rendering
commands into the CA Eagle layer,
and they can be displayed.
And if you want, you can also optionally
attach a depth buffer.
[Transcript missing]
And the last thing I want to say
about Eagle before we move on is
that we fully support sharing of
objects between OpenGL ES contexts.
And there's information about how to do
this in the iPhone OS Programmer's Guide.
We mention it here for completeness.
All right, so we've talked about a
bunch of concepts here.
Let's just take a quick look
at the Xcode template that will
tie this all together for you.
So I'm going to switch
to the demo machine here.
Now, first thing I'm going to
do is launch Xcode here.
And I'm going to create a new project.
We provide right here
the OpenGL ES application
template for you to use.
And it's a great starting point,
because it does all of this
complicated work for setting
up your framebuffer object,
initializing your context.
It does this all for you.
Now, if you simply choose this project,
we'll create it right here.
and you'll see that we basically
instantiated a bunch of files for you.
Now,
I haven't added anything to this project.
I'm simply going to look quickly
at some of the implementation.
Now, the first thing you'll notice
here is that this template will
instantiate in a subclass of UIView,
just like we recommended.
[Transcript missing]
in this initialization routine here
will allocate an Eagle context.
and it will initialize it
with our rendering API,
and it will set our
context to be current.
The next thing that we can
notice about this routine,
this method, is that it sets up the
frame buffer for us.
So it does the steps I just outlined,
generate your render
buffer and frame buffers,
call render buffer storage from drawable,
passing in this CA Eagle layer
we just allocated,
and attaches the color
render buffer attached to the
CA Eagle layer to our frame buffer.
And the last key point about the template
is it has basically a placeholder for
you to put your OpenGL ES rendering code.
And you can see right here that basically
it just has the same kind of OpenGL code
you're probably familiar with,
setting up some state,
clearing the screen,
and issuing a draw call.
All right, we'll come back to this
template in a moment,
but I want to talk a little
bit next about some of the
implementation details of the iPhone
OS OpenGL ES so that you can use them
when designing your own application.
So we can switch back to
the presentation machine.
There we go.
The first thing we want to
say is that the iPhone OS and
iPhone is using the Imagination
Technologies PowerVR MBX Lite GPU.
Now, this is a terrific
GPU for embedded devices.
It supports hardware-accelerated
OpenGL ES 1.1 fully,
full vertex and fragment
processing acceleration.
And it's designed for embedded systems.
It's designed for the types of
devices just like the iPhone.
It implements a couple of
techniques in that design that can
use memory and to use the system
in the most efficient manner.
The first one is called Tile-Based
Deferred Mode Rendering,
and the second one is
Hidden Surface Removal.
I'll talk a little bit about each of
those because they will affect how you
write some of your application code.
These are basically guidelines that
will affect the best way that you
should use to get the most performance
and efficiency out of the system,
not the correctness of what you render.
But they're still important.
to keep in mind.
So what is Tile-based
Deferred Mode Rendering?
Well, a traditional renderer is going
to render each polygon in order,
in the order that you send it to OpenGL.
A Tile-based Deferred Mode Renderer,
on the other hand,
actually takes a different tack.
In order to minimize its access to memory
and use memory the most efficient manner,
it's going to store entire
frames worth of data at a time.
It's going to then break
that data into tiles.
Generally,
tiles are organized by screen position.
And it will create a list of rendering
commands for each of those tiles.
Once it's done that,
it will process each tile.
And once it has this whole
list of the scene data,
it can actually figure out exactly which
pixels need to be processed for any tile.
It only needs to process
the visible ones,
which saves it a bunch of work.
And then it writes out
the final pixel values.
Now why does this matter?
Well, as we said,
it's incredibly efficient.
It allows you to get the really
great performance that you saw
in some of the demos so far.
And it just basically can save battery
life and processing time for you.
But there's a caveat that
certain types of operations you
might be used to using on other
implementations can be more expensive.
And basically,
those are the set of operations
that depend on previous
rendering having been completed.
Again, this batches up a whole tile,
a whole frame's worth of data into
tiles every time before it renders.
So anything you do that says, hey,
I'm done rendering,
can cause us to go through this process,
looking through all of the
information that is in the scene,
and figuring out the
best way to render it.
We'll talk a little bit more
about that when we get to
our best practices section.
There's a few other implementation
details we wanted to highlight.
We support 16 and 32-bit color buffers.
We support an optional
24-bit depth buffer.
And we don't support stencil buffers in
the iPhone OS OpenGL ES implementation.
There's two texture units that can be
up to 1024 pixels in width and height,
and must be a power of two.
And there's eight lights and
one clip plane supported.
All right.
So we've talked a lot about the
details of OpenGL ES on the iPhone.
We're going to spend a few moments
talking about using OpenGL ES on
the iPhone simulator next.
So what can we say about that?
Well, this is an entirely second
OpenGL ES implementation
in the iPhone OS SDK.
This one runs on your host Mac,
and it allows you to write your
code in the simulator on your Mac,
test it out, make sure everything's
rendering correctly before you
ever deploy it to a device.
This is incredibly handy.
Now, the functionality is extremely
similar to what's on the device.
However, the performance profile is very,
very different,
or it can be very different.
So you want to use the simulator
to get real fast turnaround
and do rapid experiments,
make sure everything's drawing properly,
but you want to use the device
for all your performance tuning
and your mainline development.
[Transcript missing]
So we can take a look next at
a demo of the OpenGL ES support
in the iPhone simulator.
So I'll go back to the demo machine.
And the first thing we want to show
is actually the exact same template
we just were looking at a moment ago.
Now,
if we can see what this is about to draw,
we have -- it's going to
draw a triangle strip here.
It's got some rotation.
So let's take a look here and target
first the iPhone OS simulator.
This is the same project.
I didn't actually
change any of this code.
It just came from the template,
so you can try this in your
own version of the SDK.
And all I'm going to do
is click Build and Go.
Simulator launches,
and we have OpenGL ES rendering
in the simulator.
And this is, as I said,
it's very convenient to use the simulator
for sort of quick little experiments.
So if I wanted to stop this
application and actually say,
oh, I need to change my mind.
I actually would like the background
color to be a little different,
and I want the rotation of this
square to be a little different,
I can actually save that, change it,
and with a few keystrokes,
I can see the results of what I changed.
So this is very, very handy.
Now, actually, if we can switch back to
the slides for one moment,
I want to show one other
bit of information.
So a few years ago at WWDC,
we showed a demo running on
MacOSX that was highlighting
the use of framebuffer objects.
And that demo was called FBO Bunnies.
Now,
this was back when FBO bunnies were new.
And we thought, well,
we're using frame buffer objects
very heavily on the iPhone.
This would be a good candidate
demo to run on the iPhone itself.
So we decided, great,
we're going to take FBO bunnies,
we're going to change it
from OpenGL to OpenGL ES,
and we thought, great,
this demo needs a new name.
So we decided we would
give it a new name.
is now FBO Bunnies.
So switch back to the demo machine here,
and we'll show that demo running.
Okay, so we'll quit out of our
project that was the template,
and we'll switch into our second demo.
And this is the bunnies demo.
Now, first off, let's take a look at this
thing running on the Mac.
Now, we can do this by, again,
just a few project settings.
will have this run just so you
can see what it looked like
when it was running on the Mac.
Now, this is running in a MacOS window
using the native OpenGL implementation
on the Mac using OpenGL ES here.
This demo basically draws
this bunny into a texture,
texture maps it,
puts it on the side of a cube, and then,
as bunnies often want to do, multiplies.
And then it does a depth of
field effect on the bunnies.
All this is done with the
Frame Buffer Object API and some
render to texture techniques.
Let's take a look at that same
demo running in the simulator.
Now, actually, before we do that,
let's see what we actually
had to do to get this running.
So at the top of this file,
we have this target OS additional
we've set to target the device,
the iPhone versus the Mac.
And if we look at what we
actually had to change,
you'll see it's a very,
very small amount of changes.
The first change here is we
have to include a slightly
different set of headers.
OpenGL on the Mac,
OpenGL ES on the phone.
And we also include a slightly
different set of names for
the FrameBufferObject API.
As we mentioned earlier,
this is the OES FrameBufferObject API.
But basically, it's the same.
You can see all we really did was
change a few values on the suffix.
And lastly,
there's a change here from single
precision to double precision.
But that's it.
We don't actually use this
conditional anywhere else in the file.
And we have one other very subtle
change in that the iPhone OS uses Eagle,
as we've described,
to manage its windows,
while the Mac uses Glut, or can use Glut.
And this is just a simple little demo,
so we decided to use it.
So the Mac sets up its code
here using the Glut APIs.
And the OpenGL ES The iPhone
version uses the Eagle template
that we set up earlier.
So let's see this running first
now on the iPhone simulator.
Here's the demo running on the simulator.
So this is actually very cool.
Like, we haven't hardly
changed the code at all.
We made a few little syntactic
changes to some lines of code.
But the content is all exactly the same.
It draws.
It looks the same.
And it performs pretty well.
This is running in the simulator.
So let's take a look next at this
exact same code running on the device.
This time, we actually won't need to
change the code at all.
We'll simply target the
device in the Xcode window.
And I need to switch to the
iPhone display screen here.
All right.
So we'll get this running.
There we go.
In theory.
Ah, there we go.
Great.
So here's the same demo.
We were just running it
on the Mac a moment ago.
Our demo from a few years ago, WWC,
showing the state of the
art technology on your Mac.
And now, the power of that rendering
is in your iPhone.
So let's stop that,
and we'll come back to that demo
one more time in a few moments.
Well, let's take a look at
our last section here.
So we want to spend some
time-- back to the slides,
please-- spend some time talking about
our recommendations and best practices
for developing your own application.
So we've divided these
into a few sections.
The first sections are just some general
guidelines and how to best coexist and
how to use the CAEagle layer efficiently.
And then we talk a fair amount
about optimizing your application
to minimize memory bandwidth,
storage, and CPU overhead.
[Transcript missing]
Another key point.
A lot of developers who do
embedded device programming are
used to not having a full floating
point support on their processor,
so they may have some kind of
emulated support for floating point.
The iPhone CPU fully supports
floating point natively,
so this is just wasted work.
So if you have that code in something
you're trying to port to the iPhone,
you should just get rid of it,
because it won't help you out here,
and it'll just eat up your CPU.
In the OpenGL ES case,
there's a lot of features
in OpenGL ES that give you
real high quality rendering,
but are more expensive
than some other features.
Such things as blending and
lighting can be expensive.
So you don't want to leave those
enabled if you don't need to.
Now there's sort of a
trade-off to be made,
because our next recommendation is
actually to avoid OpenGL ES state
changes as much as possible.
Now, these are somewhat in conflict,
because if there are certain
expensive features you have enabled,
you may want to turn
them off to disable them,
but you don't want to be
toggling them back and forth.
So in general,
what we can say is that OpenGL ES state
changes in general can be expensive,
and you should take steps
to try and minimize them.
You can do this by keeping a shadow
copy of your OpenGL ES state,
and this can help you avoid
redundant state changes,
and it can also avoid the need to
query the OpenGL for its state.
Now, the next two points are really
influenced by the tile-based
deferred mode rendering architecture.
And as we mentioned them briefly earlier,
but you want to minimize the
number of rendering destination
changes within a given frame.
And you want to carefully schedule any
of the operations in OpenGL ES that can
cause you to force a frame to finish.
And you basically want to do these at the
beginning or perhaps the end of a frame,
but not lots of times in
the middle of your frame.
Now there's a few more techniques
here in this sort of general category.
You want to use alpha blending
instead of alpha testing.
This might be a little counterintuitive
on other implementations.
Alpha blending might be really expensive,
and alpha testing might be, you know,
saving you the cost of
doing that expensive work.
But in this implementation,
alpha tests can actually
defeat the hidden surface
removal techniques in the GPU,
and alpha blending is
actually very inexpensive.
You generally want to draw
your opaque objects first and
your blended objects last.
And this can help increase the
effectiveness of the hidden
surface removal parts of the GPU.
And you want to try and minimize certain
state changes that can be expensive.
And some of these include
things like scissor,
viewport, and dither state.
Generally, these are not things that you
might change often anyway.
But we've seen a fair amount
of applications coming to the
iPhone where they're not used
to these things being expensive.
And so we wanted to call that out.
We also recommend that you don't
allocate a depth buffer unnecessarily.
So if you're going through
some effort to sort your state,
you can actually save some memory
bandwidth by not even bothering
to allocate a depth buffer.
It simply can waste memory
storage and also bandwidth.
And lastly, in this category,
we want to say that you should
try and minimize the number of
draw calls that you're making.
So you can do this by, again,
sorting your state to put similar
states together before drawing.
And you can also do this through little
tricks like joining your triangle strips
together with some degenerate triangles.
The next section we want to talk
about here is how to best coexist
with the iPhone OS user interface.
Now, as we mentioned,
we're rendering into
Core Animation layers.
And Core Animation is very
efficient at compositing
content from different sources.
But in general,
when you're playing a game,
you mostly want to focus in on
the content you're generating.
So if you want the most
efficient display path possible,
you need to use screen
size CA Eagle layers.
In general,
you also want to avoid making any kind of
transformations on your CA Eagle layers
in the Core Animation API.
If you need to do simple transformations,
such as running in landscape mode,
you can do that with
the OpenGL API itself.
Now, if you do it with Core Animation,
it will all work.
It's just you might want to save
that for special effects or cases
where you're not trying to run at
your highest possible frame rate.
There's a few other areas of concern and
tips we wanted to mention with respect
to coexisting with the user interface.
So as we mentioned, for best performance,
generally you want to be
the only thing rendering.
And so typically you want to
use the CA Eagle layer's opaque
property and set that to yes,
so that your content is essentially
treated as opaque by core animation.
And this generally means avoid
blending your content with the UI.
Once again, this will work just fine,
but we recommend you don't do
it if you're in a performance
sensitive region of your code.
Now, if you decide you do want to
composite OpenGL ES and your UI,
we still recommend that you
leave the opaque setting of
the CA Eagle layer to yes.
So it means you still
want to leave it opaque.
But you want to put your
OpenGL ES content below
is a great example of how
OpenGL ES can drive iPhone games
and other mobile 3D applications.
Jeremy Sandmel is a great example of
how OpenGL ES can drive iPhone games
and other mobile 3D applications.
Jeremy Sandmel is a great example of
how OpenGL ES can drive iPhone games
and other mobile 3D applications.
Jeremy Sandmel is a great example of
how OpenGL ES can drive iPhone games
and other mobile 3D applications.
Jeremy Sandmel is a great example of how
OpenGL in OpenGL to make this happen.
And last, this is, once again,
an embedded device.
Very powerful.
It can do really great things.
But you're sharing resources
with the rest of the system here.
So generally,
you want to avoid simultaneous
rendering with OpenGL ES and
UIKit or Core Animation if you
have performance sensitive code.
Now, we'll say a few things quickly
about optimizing for memory
and vertex and texture next.
So first for memory,
you're using a shared memory system.
And what that means is that the memory
that you're using for graphics is
not necessarily available to the rest
of the system when you're using it.
So you generally want to use no
more than 24 megs of memory for
your textures and your surfaces.
And we actually enforce this limit.
Now, we say generally you don't
want to use more than this,
but actually, you know,
you're better off the less you're using.
So you should try and stay as
far below that as possible.
And we give a few techniques in
the next few slides that show
exactly how you can do that.
But some examples,
you can compress your texture data using
the PVRT texture compression format.
And you can also deallocate other memory
that you're not using in the system,
such as the textures
you've just given OpenGL.
Similarly, when dealing with vertex data,
you want to minimize the amount
of vertex data you're sending.
Now, you can do this through
a variety of techniques,
such as using indexed triangle strips,
or you can actually fake the system out,
fake the user out,
by not sending the geometry
in the first place,
either culling it yourself or using
techniques like dot 3 lighting or
texture to just simply make it look
more complex than it actually is.
Generally, you want to use the smallest
amount of data you can.
And this is sort of a general rule
for all of the OpenGL ES programming.
For instance,
you can get by with 4 byte colors,
or maybe two texture
coordinates instead of four,
or shorts for your texture
coordinates instead of floats.
This is good.
You want to generally pack your
data as tightly as possible.
And you want to generally
avoid fixed point vertex data.
The reason we mention this is that,
once again, if you're coming from
other embedded platforms,
maybe you're using that
for efficiency purposes.
Or performance.
On this platform,
floating point data is just fine.
If you're going to use 32-bit data,
you might as well use floating
point and get the performance.
I'm sorry, get the precision.
Now, on the subject of lighting,
there's a few other key points here.
Generally, the lighting is fully
accelerated by the GPU,
but certain types of lights
are more expensive than others.
So in your lighting model,
you want to use the
simplest model you can.
And this might mean using fewer
lights or simpler types of lights.
So you can use directional
lights instead of spotlights.
And you can even pre-compute your
lighting if you find that you can
store the values in a color or texture.
All right.
Lastly, in the subject of textures,
we want to say that you
should try to minimize your
texture storage requirements.
This is, again,
this general rule of minimizing the
amount of memory you're consuming,
because it not only saves you storage,
but it saves you bandwidth.
All of that data has
to be read by the GPU.
So if you can get by with
16-bit color for your textures,
you should try it,
and also for your rendering surfaces.
And if you can use the PVRTC compression
format for your textures,
this can provide a huge win,
because it can drastically reduce
the amount of texture storage and
memory bandwidth that you need.
We provide a tool in the SDK,
the path listed here on the slide,
to actually allow you to
create textures in this format,
convert from RGBA values to this
PVRTC texture compression format.
And when you're using this format,
it's generally a good idea to check out
what the compression format looks like.
We provide this tool.
It will actually give
you a preview of that,
because certain types of images
will compress better than others.
So you can take a look at that.
Two last points.
When using MIT mapping,
we generally recommend
you use-- first of all,
we generally recommend you
use MIT mapping because that
can also improve efficiency.
But also, you should try and use the
linear MIT map nearest setting to
improve efficiency the greatest.
And lastly, again,
as an influence of the tile-based
deferred mode renderer,
you want to try and minimize
the number of times you're
modifying sub-regions of textures.
All right,
so the last thing we want to say about
our best practices is use the tools.
We have really great tools
in the iPhone OS SDK.
And one of them is instruments.
We've seen some demos so far.
I'm going to show you how to use
instruments next with OpenGL ES.
So we can switch to
the demo machine here.
Okay, so let's take a look
back at our bunnies demo.
And what we will do is we will
set this to the release setting,
just because we're going to
be looking at performance.
And what we want to do first
is run this demo on the device.
So I'm going to rebuild and
run the demo on the device,
the FBO bunnies demo.
And if you can switch for a
moment to the iPhone display.
That's running on the device here.
And so this will give you a feel
for just from looking at it,
you know,
what the performance is right now.
And if we switch for a moment
back to the demo machine here,
I'll show you what we
can do with instruments.
So I'm going to leave this
running on the device,
but I'm going to switch
in Open Instruments.
And Instruments provides
a default template for
OpenGL ES performance app monitoring.
So if you can click on that,
and we choose that,
We will get the instruments panel
with the OpenGL ES template.
And in this panel,
we can simply choose to
attach to our running process,
which I'll do right here.
Once we've done that, I'm going to start.
And it begins recording
statistics from the device.
So the device statistics I'm recording
right here are frames per second,
the basic measurement of performance.
Just to get a feel for it right now,
we can see we're capturing a
few different measurements here.
But you can see it's kind of
noodling around between maybe
22 to a high of 27 on here.
So we'll call it 25 frames per second.
All right.
Now let's take a look and
stop this for one moment,
and I'm going to go back and
check out another setting that we
have in the application itself.
So if I look at the application,
we decided when we're looking at
converting this to run in OpenGL ES and
to run on the iPhone instead of a Mac,
there's a few tips and techniques
that we've recommended here today
we wanted to take advantage of.
So we've listed them here.
I won't go through them one at a time,
but the first one is -- well,
you decided to use short
arrays instead of floats.
So this converted our floating point data
to short data and gave that to the GPU,
and this was a considerable
performance win.
We also looked at
batching up our rendering.
So once again, taking similar states,
putting them together through
a variety of techniques,
and minimizing the number of
draw calls we actually had to do.
And lastly,
we looked at using 32-bit color
before we convert to 16-bit color.
to see what effect that gets.
So I'm actually going to turn that on.
I'm going to stop it from running.
I'm going to rebuild and recompile it.
[Transcript missing]
And you can see now,
performance actually,
although it's noodling around,
is noodling around a higher number here.
And if we let it sort of settle in,
we see it kind of settles in at about
a little above 30 frames a second.
So we've taken a few of these techniques,
such as using smaller vertex size data,
using 32-bit versus 16-bit
colors-- we chose 16-bit-- and
batching up our state changes.
And we got-- well, this is pretty good.
We got about a 20% performance boost.
Now I want to look at a few
other statistics we have here.
There's quite a few here,
and they have some confusing names.
We wanted to call out a few of
them that are really important.
So we've obviously got frames per second.
Now we want to see-- another one that's
important is GART resident object size.
And that is a measure of
how much memory we're using.
And the last one we want to click on here
is command buffer implicit submit count.
Now, Instruments plots all these
for us up here and tracks
their statistics down here,
and I'll just tell you what
these are as we go through them.
So the first one is
CommandBufferImplicitSubmitCount.
That is a measurement of how
many times the implementation
needed to submit the scene on your
behalf because of this tile-based
deferred-mode rendering architecture.
We batch up a certain amount of data,
then we submit it to the GPU.
And generally, you want that number to be
zero or as low as possible.
If you see that number climbing,
you're generally going to
be seeing some performance
issues that you want to avoid.
And you can avoid them by taking
advantage of all the techniques
that we've mentioned today,
minimizing the amount of
data that you require,
minimizing the amount of draw calls.
So that's a number you
want to watch out for.
The other number here is
the GartResidentObjectSize.
Now, again, a bit of a confusing name,
but it's basically telling you how
much memory the GPU is needing to use.
Right now, as we look at it,
it's using right about 3 megs of memory.
I didn't show this before,
but in the other version of this demo,
before we turned on our faster options,
it was using right
about 4 megs of memory.
So we saved a quarter of our
memory by turning these options on.
And again,
that can help with performance.
Okay, cool.
So I'm going to stop this demo now and
show you one last demo that kind of
puts a lot of this stuff all together.
So we've shown you some spinning
squares and some cute and fuzzy bunnies.
We'll show you something
a little more interesting.
will show you how to use
OpenGL ES to drive iPhone games
and other mobile 3D applications.
This demo is a demo from
the iPhone-- I'm sorry,
from the Imagination
Technologies PowerVR MBX SDK.
And what this demo shows is sort
of some typical game-like content
you can create using OpenGL ES.
The demos from the SDK,
the Imagination Technologies SDK,
show off a lot of these
tips and techniques,
and we'll see what this
demo looks like here.
So we have our robots coming out,
much scarier than fuzzy bunnies.
And the robots will come out,
and they'll say hi to each other.
And this is exactly the kind of content
which looks really great on the iPhone.
You know, it's really focused in on sort
of game-like rendering scenes.
And here the robots, they begin fighting,
as robots often do.
[Transcript missing]
is sort of the hidden Steadicam
guy following behind him.
Now this part makes me sad.
He really knows how to
kick a guy when he's down.
All right, great.
So that is robots.
Many thanks to Imagination
Technologies for providing a demo.
OK, so now I'll switch back
to the slides here.
And I just want to give a quick review.
So there's some key statistics you
want to measure with instruments.
There's raw performance you
can get with frames per second.
There's the graphics memory usage
with the GART resident object size,
and the implicit scene flushing,
command buffer implicit submit count.
And again, we want to highlight all of
these for you so you can use them
in tuning your applications to
run an OpenGL ES on the iPhone.
Let's take a look at
what we've learned today.
So we started off by
discussing OpenGL ES,
what it is, how you use it,
how it's a subset of desktop OpenGL 1.5,
and what features it contains and
what features have been removed.
And we learned that it's
incredibly powerful.
All of the key features for doing
hardware accelerated vertex and
fragment processing are all still there.
And you can use it to create robots
and fuzzy bunnies and all of the
other cool demos we've seen so far.
We also spent some time talking about
using OpenGL ES on the iPhone itself.
And for that,
we looked at some key new technologies,
such as the Eagle API for
creating your contexts,
Frame Buffer Objects API for
managing your frame buffer,
and the CA Eagle Layer subclass
of Core Animation for
displaying your content and
integrating with the iPhone OS.
We also took a look at the
iPhone OS support in the
iPhone-- OpenGL ES support
in the iPhone simulator.
And in there,
we found that we have a fully
featured OpenGL ES implementation.
And we found that we have a fully
featured OpenGL ES implementation
in the simulator,
which you can use to do your initial
development and algorithmic testing,
make sure all your code
runs and looks just great.
But you should do your
performance tuning on the device,
using tools such as
instruments and other tools,
such as SHARP.
And finally, we spent a good deal of
time talking about the best
practices and recommendations.
Most of these focused
in on two key areas,
specifically understanding
how to best use the tile-based
deferred mode renderer,
and how to minimize memory bandwidth,
CPU overhead, driver overhead,
and memory storage.
We have some more information.
You can take a look at the iPhone OS SDK,
where we go through all of
this in much more detail.
And we also have all of the sample
code and tools that you can use
to do your performance techniques,
performance optimization.
You should also take a look at the
OpenGL ES website on chronos.org.
We have a ton of
information about OpenGL ES,
documentation,
and a lot of good recommendations
for how to use the API.
And also, Imagination Technologies,
makers of the
PowerVR MBX Lite GPU and the iPhone,
have a great website
about the MBX itself.
And you can find out all about
its architecture there and how
to drive it most efficiently.
Alan Schaefer,
our graphics technology evangelist,
can answer all of your questions
about OpenGL ES on the iPhone.
And there's a few additional
resources here at WWDC.
We have a lab tomorrow morning.
We encourage you all to come.
I mean, based on what we've seen so far,
we've just been blown away about...
With the SDK that people have had
for just a short period of time,
it's been really, really cool.
We've seen some amazing demos so far.
So come to the OpenGL ES lab.
We can answer your questions there.
And there's some related sessions.
There's some sessions on core animation,
general sessions on tuning
OpenGL on the desktop,
but also apply generally
to OpenGL ES on the iPhone.
And just general
performance tuning sessions.
As we saw earlier this afternoon,
there's a great session on games
for using OpenGL ES in games.
And you can check that out as well.
All right.
With that,
I thank you very much for your attention.
I hope you found this very useful.
And I'm going to turn it over to
Alan Schaefer next and ask some
members from the Embedded Graphics
team to come up to do some Q&A.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.